Now, we've written WebAssembly by hand.
And we've seen that for
more complicated used cases,
WebAssembly can get a bit onerous,
a bit cumbersome, a bit difficult to read.
But remember WebAssembly itself is
meant to be a compiled target for
high-level languages.
So that is RustC sharp PHP,
I believe you can write some PHP and
compile down to WebAssembly.
For the JavaScript side, we can write a
high level language that will compile down
to WebAssembly, and
that language is known as AssemblyScript.
AssemblyScript, at a high level,
is a TypeScript to WebAssembly compiler.
As in it uses the syntax and
the typing of TypeScript and
JavaScript to compile well
into WebAssembly modules.
I'm a really big fan of AssemblyScript for
many reasons.
I think the main one is
that its documentation and
its way of presenting itself is
really accessible to everybody.
From beginners to people are just getting
started in JavaScript to more advanced
people.
Who really want to get down to
the low level internals of memory and
byte manipulation, and actually
executing computer instruction code.
There is a level of AssemblyScript for
everybody,
and that's what I really love about it.
More importantly is when we look
at the docs, the documentation for
assembly scripts.
They put a lot of time and effort into it,
so that they make it accessible.
When I was doing research for
this course about what's the best way
to present WebAssembly to people.
A lot of the documentation I came across,
it was just really arcane a little bit.
It was so specific into the details
of memory and bid shifting and things
like that, that I didn't think it made for
a good beginner introductory course.
But when I looked at the AssemblyScript
documentation, it's clean, it's readable,
it doesn't make assumptions
about your knowledge.
And it's really written in a way that
it's designed to be accessible for
anybody reading it.
And I really have nothing but respect for
the AssemblyScript maintainers,
they clearly put a lot of work into it.
And I do believe in
the open source community,
it's important to call out good open
source work and a good healthy community.
And I think AssemblyScript
represents a lot of that.
So if you can,
should donate some money to the project.
I know I will and do there, I am really,
really happy to be teaching
AssemblyScript now.
So we learned a bit about
what AssemblyScript is,
as in it looks like
a variant of TypeScript.
I won't say you can just take
your TypeScript code and
put it directly into WebAssembly or
AssemblyScripts.
There are operations in
AssemblyScript such as storing and
loading data, writing directly to memory
that aren't available in TypeScript.
So it's not quite a one to one but
it's fairly close.
If you have large complex operations
that you're doing in TypeScripts.
And you're not doing too many things
with data structures or complex objects,
things like that.
You could actually put your code
over without too much trouble.
And now let's get started
with AssemblyScript, and
let's get our ID set up.
So I'm just going to switch over,
I have a blank IDE.
And I'm going to make a directory
called IOS, which already did.
I know I made this a bit further down in
the steps, but I'm doing it now just for
simplicity's sake.
So make a directory called iwasm, and
if you don't remember how to
make a directory, we use mkdir.
And iwasm, it's a funny name [LAUGH],
but it just stands for
introduction to WebAssembly.
So if you make that directory already did,
it's a good place to have a repo.
Next, AssemblyScripts requires
us being on the latest
version of node, so
I'm gonna say nvm instal- -LTS.
And npm is the node version manager,
if you don't have it,
I believe should have the easiest way.
I assume most people have it now,
but just in case you don't.
What is the easiest way of installing it?
We might use brew, actually,
yeah, it's a curl command.
So if you copy this curl command,
it'll add it to your bash.
Setups you can just use nvm globally,
and essentially nvm is a quick way of
versioning the node because depending
on the environment you're using.
You might need the latest version of node,
you might need an older version of node,
etc.
Right now we're using the LTS
version node, so that is,
LTS is the long term stable or
long term support.
That's a version of node that we
know is going to be supported for
at least two years or so.
So if you want to build your projects
in that, that's the way to go.
In general, if you're developing things or
you're just doing it for fun.
You can use the latest
cutting edge version of node,
I forget which node version.
We're up to is it 16?
Might be more by now, but we want
to see what the LTS version because
it's going to be the most stable,
it's going to be most consistent.
So let's check to see the version of node
that we're using to make sure we're on
the right one.
No version, okay,
we're on 14-5, that's perfect.
Anything about 14, we're okay.
Next, we're gonna install npm, so
npm- i- g for
installing globally or saw NPX.
Whoops, something happened symlink nerd.
So I already had MDX installed, so
it's just telling me that there's an error
not a problem, we should be okay.
And give me a second to
clear this terminal.
All right, so next up,
let's initiate our repo,
just it'll give us a package.JSON, etc.
So I'm gonna say npm and knit,
and call it I was it's fine.
Yes, yes, yes, cool.
And that's just gonna make
a package JSON for us,
it's gonna scaffold out a bit of things.
Not entirely necessary yet, but
it just makes things easier,
it's how I like to start up projects.
So next, let's install the software nerd.
So we need AssemblyScript, and
we need the AssemblyScript loader.
So npmi- -save, and
using AssemblyScripts and the loader.
A second, cool.
And then next, we're gonna save
the actual Assemblyscripts.
We're gonna save this as dev,
because we don't need
the AssemblyScript code in production.
We only needed to compile our
AssemblyScript into rasm, and
we're just gonna use the JSON
production along with the loader.
So I'm gonna say npmi def def save Dev,
and think I can just do AssemblyScripts.
I'll have to do the ads, alright.
So we should be in the iOS directory,
we have all of our packages installed,
we can check here, cool.
What's awesome is that AssemblyScript
will scaffold your project up for you.
It'll build out everything you want
to copy, and it'll build tests.
It'll build the directory,
the assemblies directory,
so we can run that with NPX as a net We're
gonna say.to install it in this repo.
And I was gonna say yes, and
it's all done, that's pretty nice.
So what that did was it
created these shortcuts in
the scripts in that package JSON.
It lets us build a Debug version of our
code, and optimized version of the code.
Which we'll talk about in a little bit,
but it's more of a compressed version,
more efficient version
of the WebAssembly code.
And it also scaffold out
all these folders, and
let's talk about what these folders are.
The assembly directory is where
our assembly is going to go,
there's an add function already
built in there as a scaffold.
Pretty, this should look very similar to
that minus one function we built already,
which we're gonna build it
again in AssemblyScripts.
You can ignore TS config,
that's the TypeScript config.
The build directory is where
all of the built Wasm and
WAT files are, what files are going to go.
And actually let's go ahead and run that
now, so I'm going to say npm run as build.
And if things are running correctly,
you should see an output.
And then in our build folder now,
we now have the optimize WAT folder,
it's gonna look a little confusing.
And add some glue code in there,
then we have the untouched file,
which is not as optimized and it pulls
in things from the library itself.
We're not actually directly gonna
write any more WebAssembly,
generally speaking, but
it's nice to look at the WAT file.
And it's really useful to
make a really simple example,
if you're confused about how well
somebody is working under the hood.
And then run it through the compiler,
and it spits it out and lets you.
And it pretty much gives
you the instructions for
how it's going to operate.
And I personally find that more useful
than trying to read documentation.
Like seeing what the compiler
is actually doing, I learned so
much more from doing this.
And we have a test,
I think we are gonna run npm run test,
hopefully that will work.
And it's okay, cool.
When I was creating this course,
the error I'd run into most often.
Was it'll complain about if you tried to
do a build, it'll complain about the.
It can't use ES modules,
which are a newer module syntax,
that's why we have to use
the latest version of node.
So if you're running to that error,
double check that the terminal you're
using is using the latest version of node.
I guarantee that's probably the problem,
I've done it several times because I
switch terminals all the time and every.
Bash instance has its own version
of node because we're using npm.
There's a question in chat, Todd.
>> For the syntax highlighting,
should we get that WebAssembly extension?
>> Yeah, thank you.
I'm glad you mentioned that,
I do believe I have that installed.
Let me search my, da da da.
What is the way Sandy Brian Holden
is VS code expertise,
I think at installed will tell me.
And then if I say WebAssembly, yeah.
>> Okay, thank you.
>> So unfortunately I do this
myself [LAUGH] all the time,
I've installed I think three
different [LAUGH] WebAssembly.
So I'm not sure which one is
actually being used right now,
I am an average engineer.
I make mistakes,
I don't know the details of everything.
I think the WebAssembly Toolkit
is the official one from
the WebAssembly Foundation, so I would I
generally go with the blast version of it.
And I think it's the WebAssembly syntax
highlighting is the one I'm using,
but whatever works, is what I say.
I'm actually not even sure
the WebAssembly toolkit is necessary.
It's a way of compiling folders or
way of compiling
WAT files which I think
I must have a disabled.
But there is a WebAssembly extension that,
you can write dot WAT files,
right click and it will convert into Wasm.
That's probably not really what
you want to do, generally, but
I would use WebAssembly studio for
something like that.
But if you had to,
it's good to know these tools exists, and
thank you for calling them out.
And if you have any questions about my
setup environment, please let me know.
I try to write down every
single step that I've done, so
we're always aligned on the same page.
But I may have missed something here and
there, but great question.
Okay, So we are here,
in case in the future these changes,
some of these steps change.
We were just following the Quick Start
guide from AssemblyScripts.
So if you follow this, we should.
And even if things change in the future,
we'll generally end up in the same place
with the same folder structure,
things like that.
But just in case,
because open source changes a lot.
Just fall back to these instructions
if they're not working.